research/Pedagogy_as_Research.md, before:

<!-- Filename: 5_Pedagogy_as_Research.md -->
# 5) Pedagogy-as-Research (Courses as Methods)

_Last updated: 2025-09-16 (America/Chicago)_

### 5.1 Robotics & Vibe Coding — Level 1 (8×2h)
Blink→bots with attitude; mixed audiences; three dialects of making.
- **Artifacts to (re)gather**
  - [ ] Syllabus PDF + teacher quickstart
  - [ ] Enrichment track outline
  - [ ] Notes on 12-bot capacity & material budgets
- **Next micro-step**: Export current syllabus draft to PDF.

### 5.2 Sound Design at Children’s Theatre (8×2h)
Motivated MS/HS; station-cards; hands-on acoustics + storytelling.
- **Artifacts to (re)gather**
  - [ ] Session packets
  - [ ] Example stems
  - [ ] Reflection prompts
- **Next micro-step**: Gather 5 sample stems into `/assets/stems/`.

### 5.3 Intro Sound Design (HS; phones + Chromebooks) (22×1h)
BandLab + littleBits; daily one-cards and step-throughs.
- **Artifacts to (re)gather**
  - [ ] `station-cards.md`
  - [ ] BandLab setup tips
  - [ ] Day 1–4 step-throughs
- **Next micro-step**: Export Day 1 as `day01.md` with teacher/student sections.

### 5.4 Web Design (p5.js, art-forward)
Code-from-scratch + installations; community partners.
- **Artifacts to (re)gather**
  - [ ] Syllabus snapshot
  - [ ] Gallery install photos
- **Next micro-step**: Add two p5.js gallery photos to the course README.

Commit message:

Add front matter to research notebooks

research/Pedagogy_as_Research.md, after:

---
title: "Pedagogy-as-Research (Courses as Methods)"
layout: default
permalink: /research/Pedagogy_as_Research/
---

<!-- Filename: 5_Pedagogy_as_Research.md -->
# 5) Pedagogy-as-Research (Courses as Methods)

_Last updated: 2025-09-16 (America/Chicago)_

### 5.1 Robotics & Vibe Coding — Level 1 (8×2h)
Blink→bots with attitude; mixed audiences; three dialects of making.
- **Artifacts to (re)gather**
  - [ ] Syllabus PDF + teacher quickstart
  - [ ] Enrichment track outline
  - [ ] Notes on 12-bot capacity & material budgets
- **Next micro-step**: Export current syllabus draft to PDF.

### 5.2 Sound Design at Children’s Theatre (8×2h)
Motivated MS/HS; station-cards; hands-on acoustics + storytelling.
- **Artifacts to (re)gather**
  - [ ] Session packets
  - [ ] Example stems
  - [ ] Reflection prompts
- **Next micro-step**: Gather 5 sample stems into `/assets/stems/`.

### 5.3 Intro Sound Design (HS; phones + Chromebooks) (22×1h)
BandLab + littleBits; daily one-cards and step-throughs.
- **Artifacts to (re)gather**
  - [ ] `station-cards.md`
  - [ ] BandLab setup tips
  - [ ] Day 1–4 step-throughs
- **Next micro-step**: Export Day 1 as `day01.md` with teacher/student sections.

### 5.4 Web Design (p5.js, art-forward)
Code-from-scratch + installations; community partners.
- **Artifacts to (re)gather**
  - [ ] Syllabus snapshot
  - [ ] Gallery install photos
- **Next micro-step**: Add two p5.js gallery photos to the course README.
